Hi, I'm Nic Steenhout, and
this is The Work Between.
In case you didn't know, I
provide transcript reviewed for
accuracy by a human for every
episode at the time of
publishing. There's a text-only
transcript that you could read
if audio isn't the best  media
for you. There's also a time
transcript you can follow along
while listening if that works
better for you. You can access
those directly on the podcast's
website if they aren't displayed
by your podcast aggregator,
that's the workbetween dot show.
Before I get into what the show
is, I want to say whose land
it's made on. This podcast is
recorded on the traditional,
ancestral, and unceded territory
of the Stó:lō Coast Salish
people, the people of the river,
whose presence in the Fraser
Valley stretches back 1000s of
years. I name this territory
because it belongs with what
this show is about: the ways we
decide whose lives are valued,
whose work is taken seriously,
and whose experiences are
treated as problems to be
managed. Those decisions shape
everything. This show sits
inside that. This is, was, and
always will be First Nations
land. That's not a formality.
It's consistent with everything
I, and this show stand for.
My guest today is Soren Hamby.
Soren is an artist and advocate
who survives under capitalism as
an accessibility and product
equity designer. Their natural
state is to build systems,
frameworks, and communities, and
to challenge the hidden
structures that determine
inclusion. They live in New
York's lower Hudson Valley on
unceded Ramapo Lenape land,
reshaping perceptions of living
with multiple disabilities and
intersecting identities. When
they're not busy with small
goals like changing the world,
you'll find them painting, doing
fiber arts, writing poetry, or
collecting different ways of
making and creating, which they
see as essential human needs.
Most of our conversation
revolved around poetry. We also
spoke about fiber arts and the
line between necessity and
expression, about vision loss
and the pull between digital and
physical media, and the impact
of late neurodivergence
diagnosis.
Soren, thank you for accepting
to talk with me about creativity
and identity and disability.
Welcome to the show.
Thanks so much for having
me. I'm really glad to be here,
and this is such a great thing
that you're doing.
I'm glad you enjoy that.
Let's start with the first
question, which perhaps is the
most obvious one. But tell me
about your art or creative
practice. What is it that you
do? And I think, I think you do
a few things that are related to
making and creating. So tell me
a little bit about that.
Yeah. So there's a couple
of things, and I I kind of
divide them into more necessity
or expression. So one one realm
that I kind of get into is doing
things that are I make things
because I can't get them
commercially or I can't get them
easily. So it's like like
knitting and crochet and sewing
and things where I'm you know
making things with my hands, and
the the primary object is not to
make something that's decorative
or or narrative. And so I've
been doing that for a very long
time. And I just recently got
into doing some decorative and
narrative crochet through doing
like tapestry work. The other
thing, of course, is expressive,
which now I'm starting to bleed
the line, blur the lines between
those. But doing things like
painting, watercolor, drawing,
and poetry, I would say that
those are those are kind of my
big ones. With poetry being one
that's top of mind right now
because we just had the National
Poetry Writing Month in April.
For me, poetry is a is a
mixed emotions kind of thing. I
don't write poetry, but my
father is a several-time
published poet, and we have this
thing that he shows me his
poetry, and I read it, and I
hear what he's saying, but
poetry just kind of doesn't
click with me. So I'd be curious
to know more about your poetry.
How did you learn? How did you
get started with that?
So I had a really great
English teacher in high school,
mrs. Garren. She had this
project where she had the whole
class contribute to a book of
poetry, and that's where I
really first got started. And
this project really stood out to
me because I also got to
organize the project and design
the cover, so that was just a
really formative experience for
me. And then I continued doing
poetry just for fun in high
school. I kind of dropped out of
doing it when I lead in life
kind of took over and my
interest took other avenues, but
then I got back into doing it
when I picked up my life in the
southern U.S. and moved to the
Lower Hudson Valley in 2017. And
the community that I integrated
with first up here was a poetry
community, and I just found a
lot of acceptance and a lot of a
lot of other people that had
disabilities or that were
LGBTQ+. So it was just a really
great opportunity for me to
interface with people. And the
more time you spend hanging out
with poets, I feel the the more
you feel like you have something
to say and write about.
Yeah.
So it's like, oh well,
I'm hearing lots of things about
you know other people's
experiences with bad
relationships or with you know
different bigotry, but I don't
hear my story. So maybe there is
space for me to tell my story,
so I got back into doing it, and
my poetry specifically has the
flavor of some kind of natural
space sort of metaphors, and I
also pull on mythology a lot, so
it becomes a way for me to
explore some of my other
interests, because I get to deep
dive into what's the meaning
behind this mythological story,
or maybe like what is you know
like some of the mechanics
behind some of the really
interesting science things that
I'm weaving into my story.
Sometimes people don't
understand all of the meaning
behind it, but one of the
favorite things in poetry
circles to say is "specific is
the best general". The more
specific you can make something,
even if people don't understand
it, they relate to that
specificity of it. They relate
to the way that you're
expressing your internal
experience. It's like taking the
internal and making it external.
And so, if you can get someone
to understand what it's like,
and what, and like, even if they
don't understand how it is to
feel that way, they understand
the intensity of your feelings.
They understand that that's
something you care about.
Do you write for yourself,
or do you write for others? Who
do you write for?
I definitely write for
myself. I would say there's a
lot of stuff that I've written
that has never and will never
see an open mic. And there's
stuff that I've written and I
go, oh wow, that was really bad.
Like it's not a good poem, but
I'm glad that I wrote it, and
that's what National Writing
Month in April is about. It's
like about building a writing
muscle and about like writing a
lot every day. It's about just
trying to make time to do it,
and the expectation is kind of
like you won't have 30 finished,
ready to perform poems at the
end of a 30 month prompt sprint.
Like you will have maybe like
one or two good poems that come
out of it, if you're lucky. But
the the whole idea is to like
get used to editing and writing
and making the practice part of
it a little bit more of of the
process rather than just like
when inspiration hits.
Yeah, I I find something
very similar with with sketching
is even if I put 10 minutes a
day on doing sketching every
day, I'm not as stuck. I I keep
going, and maybe a 10 minute
sketch is just a bunch of lines
that look like a squiggle, and
it's not good. But it's building
that muscle memory.
Yeah, I I would agree
with that. It's it does build
muscle memory, but I think it
also just causes you to take
some time to reflect, and also
it it helps you to dial into
things that aren't as strong of
emotion. So then, if you're ever
given the opportunity or asked
to create something that's not
driven by something that's
really strong, it becomes easier
to do. So, for instance, like if
there's a theme where you're
given money to come up with like
a poem for spring, it's a lot
harder to do that if you only
write from a place of like rage
or anger or hurt to write like a
happy spring poem that's going
to win prize money, and not that
art has to be for money or has
to be for anyone else, but just
that if you want to become more
versatile, you have to practice
at it. But if you are happy with
just writing from a place of
intense emotion, then there's
absolutely no reason to practice
getting better at writing about
other things, but I just think
that it's a good way to break
out of the the trap of having to
feel those emotions every time
as well.
Yeah,
because I think that's
part of why I write is like when
I'm editing a poem, I don't just
write it down and then it's
done. I write it. I sit there. I
edit it. I probably edit it
again. I edit it with one
person. Then I take it to a
writing group, and then I
probably take it back to someone
I trust to give me a really good
opinion on it, so it probably
goes through three to four
rounds before it ever would see
someone else's, like a
stranger's eyes or ears. So I
think, I think like the that
process of like being able to
step back from the experience a
bit and be retrospective about
it, and also just to like
distance yourself from really
intense experiences can be a
really freeing thing, and that's
one reason why I I do write.
When you get stuck with
your writing, what does that
feel like, and and what do you
do to get unstuck?
That's a great question.
So I actually got stuck for a
really long time, and I recently
got myself unstuck by doing
National Poetry Month. I feel
like sometimes you have to let
it get away from you for a
little bit. You have to let you
have to work through it and be
stuck. Sometimes I've I've like
put down a poem that I thought
wasn't very good or didn't have
very much to offer me, and then
I've come back to it and with a
little bit of perspective, or
even my life has changed. I find
that it's it's different. I have
a different perspective on it,
and then I can write it
differently, or edit it
differently, or finish it. So
that has happened a couple of
times where I've let something
sit for maybe even six months
before I've come back to it, and
I think that being able to kind
of go back and rewrite it is
also a little bit powerful in a
way because I'm I'm saying like
I can't end this story the way
that I want to. It's not stuck
in this unfinished state, and
and that that kind of feels
powerful and very self
empowering, you know. Like I'm
not being given that. I'm not
being given it. I'm I'm just
claiming it. Yeah. So that's
that's something I I really
enjoy about writing.
So what does finishing feel
like, and do you trust your own
senses of when something's done,
Never. No, I would say,
like I think doubting, doubting
is part of the process. I think
if you're ever sure of anything,
then you're probably wrong. But
I think we can feel confident
about things, and sometimes I
feel like confident that the
poem is at least ready enough to
to hear an audience. But I kind
of joke that my work is probably
never finished. It's just what
edition you get when you hear it
or read it. So I try to... I
started trying to date whenever
I do edits because I used to
just like, I used to just edit
the original, and then you know
I would look at the version
history and see what I changed.
And then as I got a little bit
more sophisticated, I would copy
and paste it when I came to like
a major revision. So I would you
know copy the entire body and
and paste it above like it was a
reply to an email, and I would
then I could look at them kind
of like side by side even, and
say okay, this is what I changed
on this line, and so I have some
poems that are just like it
looks like four emails of the
same poem with slight changes,
but I think you know now. I've
gotten to where I'm like I
should date these and just like
if I ever go back and edit them
some more, then you know you've
got the the 2026 edition versus
the the 2016 edition.
It sounds like almost
constant iteration, and maybe
you should start writing in
GitHub with version control.
That would be a really
interesting way to do it, for
sure. I I hadn't really thought
of it that way. I've been using
you know like a note taking app
for a long time, but you know
the pricing has gone up on that
since they've added a bunch of
features I didn't ask for, so
that that actually could be a
really great solution. So we're
doing a little problem solving
on this show too.
Yeah,
I really like that idea.
I I do think that art and
poetry, more specifically, is in
a constant state of iteration
because we constantly are
learning new information or new
techniques. I think we just we
let things be finished. I think
sometimes we do need to let
things be finished because you
can only erase so many times and
redraw, and sometimes we need to
move on to making something
else, and I think that's really
the more pressing thing is is
not that we necessarily finish
something and close a door, but
that we have to move on to
making other things. And for me,
I at least I I think that the
finished part of it isn't a
necessary part of the equation.
I don't write. I mean, I
write, but I write tutorials and
blog posts and all that. It's I.
I don't consider that creative
writing, but I do watercolors
and sketches, and for me, it's
it's very rarely about ending up
with a finished sketch. It's
about the process. At the same
time, I know I've I've done a
few sketches for friends, and
they're asking for revisions.
Can you revise this? And and I
have to say, well, actually, no.
I'm using actual paper. I'm
using ink. I'm using paint. And
if I'm to revise this, I have to
start from scratch. And
sometimes I'm happy to do that,
but sometimes I'm not. I I think
from a from a constant iteration
and editing, doing it
electronically like you do with
the writing would be a lot
easier.
Yeah, that's that's a
reason that I, besides just
having some, uh, some issues
with working with paper since
I've I've had vision loss, I've
tried to move a little bit
towards more digital media, like
using Procreate on my my tablet
rather than paper and pencil,
but I still do love the the
feeling that like the
tactileness of
yeah
physical media. You just
can't you can't give that up. I
feel like sometimes
For me, I work so much with
computers that real paper,
especially cold press watercolor
paper that has a good texture,
and a pen is, despite arthritis,
it's it's actually making it
worth it. But having vision
loss, it's it's very hard to
zoom in on a 8" by 10"
watercolor sheet of paper.
I knew that I had
switched over to digital a
little too much when I tried to
pinch on pinch in and zoom in on
a on a piece of paper. I was
like, okay, this is I've I've
done too many digitals now. I
need to need to do a detox.
Yeah. So you're part of a
creative community, writing
groups. What does that
connection bring for you?
Well, so the partner that
I live with started these groups
here in Rockland County, New
York, and so they've been
running them for a long time. I
think I think they're up to
something like 15 years or so,
maybe more. But it, you know,
it's decades now, and. It was a
way for me to get to meet people
in a like very digestible way
for someone with disabilities
because you know there's breaks
when you're supposed to
socialize and there's times of
more quiet. It's you know it's
it's at a place where it's not
overwhelming. We had our open
mic at my hometown town hall in
the community room, so it was
like the the environment is very
peaceful and controlled. And I
was like, you know what? This is
a really great place for me to
meet people because having
learned recently that I was
neurodivergent, I was like, I
really would like to have a
little bit more of a of a
controlled environment when
trying to like meet new people.
It just felt a little more safe
to me, and I was moving across
the country like I'd never lived
anywhere outside of the southern
United States. I was not sure
what the culture would be like,
so it just felt like it was
removing a variable for me.
Where if there have been, you
know, like bar music or bright
lights or like other things to
kind of like distract that going
to other social groups or
meetups might have not gone as
well for me because there'd be
other variables that could make
it harder for me to connect with
people. So, you know, I just
wanted to take out some of that
ambiguity and and know that at
least like I knew what the
gathering was about, I knew
where it would be, I knew what
the environment would be like,
and so like poetry kind of like
provided that for me, and then
it also provided like a built-in
kind of inclusive environment
because of just the nature of of
poetry. I feel like it's it's
made to boost marginalized
voices and to specifically
include people who are
underrepresented, so I mean,
there's all kinds of discussion
about like how much how much
people kind of like rely on a
little bit of the trauma in in
poetry, sometimes a little too
much, and I I think that like
sometimes that can that can feel
bad, like that we're monetizing
trauma when it gets to be like
professional poetry. But I think
for a hobby and for a community
group, it's really nice to have
a place where you know I'm able
to go read at open mics if I
would like to, but I can go and
just take part in small groups
and get feedback on how my
writing could be better. I get
much more interesting feedback
than I do from just you know
like running it through a spell
checker or
yeah
something like that. So
it's it's really nice, and I
also I also can kind of get
perspectives from people that I
know are coming from the same
life experiences that I have. So
Yeah.
What the most useful criticism
you've received?
I think the most useful
criticism I've received is
though the first thing that
popped into my head is I also
designed the logo and the and
some of the t-shirts and things
for this group, and I got this
comment when someone posted the
the design as a fundraiser. So
they were saying, you know,
pre-order the supports our
poetry team because at the time
there was still a national
poetry conference, and we would
send a team to it, and so we
would fundraise and send that,
send, make sure that there was
no cost to that team to go, and
so that was one way that we
fundraise. So someone commented
on it and said, "Ugly color,
stupid design", and I don't like
that word. And so we ended up
having a really interesting
conversation with this person
about poetry, about ableism, in
the comments of Facebook, just
because he didn't like our our
our design for our t shirts, and
he didn't even go to our... He
wasn't part of the community. He
just happened to see it because
somebody probably that he knew
liked it or shared it or
something, and he just felt the
need to let us know what he
thought of the design. It's
still my favorite design
feedback, actually, and I was
like, wow. It's just, it was
just so. I don't know that it's
most helpful criticism, but that
was the first thing that popped
into my head. I think the most
helpful criticism I've ever
gotten about my writing would be
that someone doesn't understand
something, and or if they if
they tell me that they
understand it in a way that I
didn't mean for them to
understand it, so then I can
kind of like change my tactics
of like how do I want to lead
them on this journey with me,
and obviously like I I didn't
lead them to the place where
they needed to go, so I need to
give better directions.
What's your relationship
with disability?
I would say long, and
it's it's been it's both sweet
because I feel like it partially
makes me who I am, but also a
bit bittersweet because I feel
like it does add a layer of
complexity to my life, and and
there is a grieving process you
go through when you're you
receive a new diagnosis or you
find that you're newly disabled
in a different way, especially
as someone with multiple
disabilities. But I've been
disabled as long as I can
remember. I have several chronic
illnesses. I've had an insulin
pump since I was a child. I've
experienced vision loss in
starting from 2016, and I was
late diagnosed neurodivergent.
So it was like all these things
about myself made sense after I
received that diagnosis, but
then also I find myself fighting
all the stigmas. So it's a
little bit of a double edged
sword, just like my relationship
with disability. It's like I
understand myself better. I can
accommodate myself better. I can
set myself up for success a
little bit better, but then I
also have that negative
experience of having to combat
people's preconceptions about
what someone with ADHD or autism
or combined type ADHD and autism
looks like or acts like or feels
like, or even just like how
capable or empathetic they are.
Like it's hard to to fight
people's like really deep seated
preconceptions about
neurodivergent stereotypes.
Honestly, I would say it's I. I
expected the ones about being
about vision loss and and
blindness. Like I, I really did
expect those, like the daredevil
comments.
Yeah,
I have a whole poem about
that. But I think there's and
and I I always expect the
platitudes, but I think I wasn't
really expecting how hard I
would have to fight against the
neurodivergence stereotypes.
I haven't been diagnosed
with ADHD, but it's the only
thing that explains so many
parts of who I am. And when when
I finally realized, hey, yeah,
that's you know, I don't have a
diagnosis, but I'll eat my hat
if I don't have ADHD. It was
like the puzzle came together,
and suddenly the picture was
clear. And at the same time,
people react very strangely. Oh,
you can't have ADHD. You're not
always bouncing off the walls,
or you can't have ADHD because
whatever. And I do think an
intangible neurodivergent
condition that that's hard to to
put your finger on is is a lot
harder for non-disabled people
to process than vision loss or
using wheelchair that kind of
thing.
Yeah, I agree with that.
I think I think too is just like
so coded in media. Like we have
entire shows about you know
neurodivergent people like a
doctor who's neurodivergent.
It's fictional, but and we even
have reality dating shows about
you know people dating with
autism. It sometimes feels a
bit. It feels a little bit like
inspiration objectification or
inspiration porn is something.
Like to call it,
yeah,
but yeah, I feel like
like sometimes we've just been
fed these these really subtle
beliefs and stereotypes through
all these different kinds of
media, whether it's you know
just like things that people
have put out in the workplace
about like how to accommodate
people that were just really
outdated, or to all the way to
movies and TV shows. So I think
you know, I've seen more
advocacy work done by
neurodivergence advocates than,
but to like combat that stuff
like in the past, like five
years, than I've seen for almost
any other kind of category of
disability, and still, I feel
like it feels like people don't
don't slow down on putting out
that that incorrect assumption
about people that have autism or
ADHD or other kinds of
neurodivergence. So it's it's
like it's hard to fight against
something that's still happening
and is still so pervasive. And
you know we still are coming out
with new seasons of whatever
show to to kind of like further
those stereotypes. So I think it
it has to be a multi multi
pronged approach. Like we have
to stop doing the harm, and we
also have to start you know
educating people. But if if we
don't if we don't stop putting
out those bad stereotypes into
the world, as like I'm saying,
we as like makers, people that
create media, then it won't have
as much of an impact for the
people that are being advocates.
So, in a way, makers are
advocates.
Let's talk advocacy. I I
know that in your professional
life you are a huge advocate of
accessibility and and disability
inclusion. Is your writing a
form of advocacy, or is your
writing a form of self therapy.
Is there a difference?
I'd say yes to both of
those, but it's it's also a form
of like an empathy exercise that
doesn't make me feel
objectified. The poem I
mentioned earlier about like
when I had vision loss, there
was like kind of an FAQ,
frequently asked questions that
I would receive, like, "Oh, has
your hearing gotten sharper?
Like, can you smell things more?
And I was like, "No, I already
could smell things like like a
bloodhound. So, no, it didn't.
My brain isn't rewiring itself
to, you know, like hear sounds
and create a sonar map in my
brain. It just doesn't work that
way yet. Yes, yet. But I would
just get these same sorts of
questions over and over again,
and so the best way I could
think to express them and to
help people find empathy for my
experience, especially
especially with how extreme it
was at the time, because while I
was going through a state of
like fluctuation with my vision,
I didn't have I didn't have any
vision in my right eye, and I
had almost no vision in my left.
So it was just a very isolating
experience. So I wanted to bring
people with me on that journey.
So it's a little bit of a
therapy of getting it out there
and saying like, this is what
I'm feeling and this is what I'm
experiencing, and like I said,
externalizing myself and putting
it out there, stepping away from
it, being able to not feel those
big feelings as much. But it's
also a way for me to to bring
people along with me and to say,
look, you may not go through
this, but this is what I'm
feeling, and you can at least
understand me, where I'm coming
from, because I've told you what
it feels like in ways that you
might be able to understand.
Do you think of yourself as
a disabled person who writes
poetry, or as a poet who happens
to be disabled, or is there no
distinction between the two for
you?
I see poetry as one of
many ways I I put work out into
the world. I think I primarily
do see myself as as a maker. And
a creator who is a disabled
person, and that's part of my
experience. Just like I don't
really see myself as like LGBTQ+
first, or as a you know like a
cat caretaker first, or anything
like that. I feel like I feel
like it does contextually change
based on the conversation what
becomes more relevant. But yeah,
I do feel like at the core, I I
am a a person with like an
octopus arms amount of interest
that I just reach out into the
world with. I think I probably
pursue more interests than other
people do, and that might be
neurodivergence, or it might
just be my my personality. Who
knows? But I do just really
enjoy a lot of different
activities to really get. get
what I want to say out there. I
also just enjoy learning new
things. I think that is a major
driver for picking up new skills
and new techniques as well. It's
like the challenge of learning
things and of retaining that
skill. Like I own that skill
now. I'm not, I'm not renting
it. I I know it now. It's it's
so interesting, and it's a way
that I can connect with other
people as well, because I don't
know if you've ever been to a
meetup or anything with any
other illustrators, but anytime
I'm around people that do poetry
or you know fiber arts or like
other kinds of woodworking or
crafting or something. It's
like, oh, I'm really jazzed. Are
you really jazzed? Let's talk
about this thing. Let me share
this technique. Oh, you don't
know about that? I have some
extra at my house. Let me give
it to you. It's like, it's like
we're best friends right now. So
I feel like I have this instant
connection.
that kind of thing. And
it just doesn't really make me
feel better. It just makes me
feel more angry the longer I go
in life,
yeah.
So I kind of wanted to
express to people like that
feeling, and at the end of it, I
talk about being the moon and
being struck by an asteroid, and
saying that the asteroid didn't
make the moon more strong, and
that like surviving adversity in
my life doesn't make me stronger
either. I was already as strong
as the moon, and it's just a
testament to my strength that
I'm still here. And I think that
hit a nerve with that person
because they they have the best
intentions, and that's exactly
who I wrote it for. These people
that have the best intentions
but don't know the effect that
they're having on their loved
ones, and so we did end up
having a really nice discussion.
But she came up to me after at
this festival that I performed
at and was like, "I don't agree
with your poem, and I was like,
"Oh, okay, you don't agree with
the poem I wrote about my
experiences-that's interesting"
and I was like, "Let's talk
about this". So, you know, we
sat, we kind of like found a
place to sit down and and had a
little discussion about it, and
I was just like, "What? What
made? What did you feel about
it? Like, and you know what what
part really stood out to you?"
And you know, we talked through
it, and that's only conflict I
ever feel like I've had with
people about things that I've
written. But I am also pretty
careful about what I put out
there. I think my day job
training has. Has definitely
left an imprint on me as far as
like I want to be the best
version of myself,
yeah,
and I don't want to leave
ambiguity out there for how how
I feel about things. So if I
can't be sure that it will it
will hit the right chord and it
will be received in the way that
I intend it to be received. Then
I just don't perform it. Maybe
it's one of those pieces that I
write and then I go, you know,
this this could be seen as
satire about this topic, or it
could be seen as I agree with
the people that are wrong on
this topic, so maybe I don't
perform this. So I think I have
a little bit of of that instinct
in me. So
yeah,
yeah.
You said earlier when I was
asking about criticism that that
some people don't understand
your writing the way you mean it
to be, and and then you brought
that again now with with the
person who actually disagreed
with your your expression of
your lived experience. How do
you feel about that gap between
what you intend and what people
take from your writing?
I think I'm especially
sensitive to that because that
is something that I've struggled
with as someone that's autistic,
and it that struggle
specifically over... my life has
led to to having a diagnosis, so
I think I'm sensitive to that,
and I'm sensitive to people
receiving the message
essentially, and so I don't like
to just like have a have a poem
that just says it like a diary
entry like here's what happened
to me today I did this and then
I did that I would rather take
people on the the sensory
experience or you know create
something that's a little bit
more cinematic or epic, and and
tell my story that way. But I
don't want the meaning to get
lost either. So a couple of
times I've done poems about
really really hard experiences
in my life that were either
traumatizing or or just
difficult to talk about, and
sometimes it helps to talk about
them in ways that are not
intensely direct. But I also
don't want to mislead people or
bring them to a place where it's
the the poem isn't about the
underlying hard issue anymore.
It's like I have a poem called
"Eggplant Soup" about an abusive
relationship, and I don't want
to lose the fact that it's about
an abusive relationship. I don't
want someone to walk away
thinking that it's a recipe for
soup. But that that's a it's
it's something where you know
once you find that like what
feels clever to you as a poet
about a particular metaphor or
something, you want to make sure
that that stays through the
writing. But sometimes when you
start adding details to it to
flesh out the rest of your time
or the rest of the story, it
gets lost, and so when that
happens, and you get feedback
that maybe like the other
details are taking away from it,
sometimes you have to cut those
down or change them or just kind
of like redirect a little bit.
It's not always like a like
complete cut. Sometimes it's
more of a of a sanding,
Are there topics that are
just completely off limit for
you? Whether because you think
your audience isn't going to be
prepared to listen, or may
completely misunderstand you, or
just because it's not something
you're ready to explore.
I don't explore topics
that I feel like I'm not the
best person to talk about. For
instance, I am a white person. I
don't talk about racism because
I'm not a person that should be
talking about experiences of
racism, I feel like there are
plenty of other people that
cover those topics. I also don't
talk about topics that I feel
like my audience isn't equipped
to talk about or receive. So
when talking about disability, I
feel like there's a there's a
level that you can get to with
people that don't have
disabilities, and I think we
know that because we know that
there's an a deeper level you
can get to with people that do
have disabilities, and you can
get there quickly. So I feel
like there's just a there's this
invisible shelf where I can
cover I can cover anything that
falls sort of like up to there,
but anything else might be seen
as like too much information or
might might distract or or be
too much for people. Another
thing is just that people lose
the hope as well. If you if you
stay too far into the bad
experiences or the things that
are really hard, they lose that
side of the hope. And I had
someone come up to me after I
performed an older piece, and
say, "I don't know. I don't know
how you go on. I I think I would
have, think I would have stopped
living" essentially, and I was
like, oh oh, you like you just
like would have just laid down
and stopped living, and they
were like, "Oh no, I probably
would find found a nice cliff".
And I was like, "Oh, okay",
well, I'm. I just like left the
conversation because I was like,
'Oh, I think I'm needed over
here", because...
How do you respond to that?
I just didn't know how to
respond to that, right? Exactly.
It happened to me in an
interview as well, which the
phrasing was a little more close
to the cliff thing. But I just I
found that people don't see the
positive in it sometimes that
being disabled is part of who I
am, and it's like been a part of
me for so long that I don't know
who I would be. I wouldn't be
this person. I would be some
other version of me without
disability. So like it's it's
it's not who I am, but it
definitely has shaped my
experience of the world, and
that experience of the world
does shape who I am, so in a in
a way it has been very formative
for me. And so, not being able
to see the hope that the
neutrality of disability is
something I really want people
to understand. It is a
completely neutral thing, like
water. It is, it is just there.
It is something that can be good
and can shape my life in ways
that I never thought it would.
It can also too much of it can
be a lot to carry.
I, we could speak about
this particular point for for a
long time. I have been hanging
out and working with disabled
people for a very long time, and
this concept of disability as
neutral is very much like the
social model of of disability,
where you know the disability is
not that you're using a
wheelchair; it's that there's a
step to get into the building.
The disability is formed by your
environment that has barriers,
and from that perspective, it's
neutral. But I think I would
also some days want to challenge
that because there are most
definitely some massive
negatives intrinsically in in
being disabled.
Oh, I agree. I think I
think it's net neutral. I guess
I should clarify it's net
neutral, but I. I I would say
that I agree with you in that as
somebody that has dealt with
chronic pain, you can't
accommodate or perfect world
yourself out of having pain.
Bingo!
You can't you like you
can't erase the time that it
takes, the extra time, the extra
care that you have to put into
things. And it's like, well, if
the world was better, I still
would have this pain, and I
don't want to have it. Like if
you could ask, if you ask me,
like, would you give up having
pain? I would say yes,
absolutely. I would love for my
baseline to be no pain, or at
least very little. I'd love for
my baseline to at least be
lower, but it's that's not how
it often ends up, and
unfortunately,
Yeah.
but. I yeah I just I
think with art we often want to
take people on the journey with
us and it just feels frustrating
when they don't see that it is
part of you or that it has
helped shape you in a way and
that can feel frustrating
because they when like I said,
they lose the hope. They they
feel like life isn't worth
living if you have a disability,
and I guess that's what I was
really trying to get at earlier.
Is that like it's frustrating
that they think that life may
not be worth living if they were
as disabled as me.
Yeah. Yeah. What do you
wish people asked about you and
your work that they don't?
Oh wow, that's a great
question. I do really wish that
sometimes people would ask me a
little bit more about what
drives my work, because I think
sometimes people just either
focus on their reaction to it.
Like, like I liked this part, I
didn't like this part. That
phrasing really stuck out to me,
which is all very nice. Like,
it's all good feedback of like,
I liked it. I didn't like it. Or
even when people react to it in
writing groups and they're like
circling and underlining and
saying, "This is this part
really good. This is really
strong. You know, lean in here.
Those are all great things. But
I I I love it when people dive
into like what drives you, what
caused you to to say this, or
what made you even explore this
topic to begin with. I think
that curiosity that that some
people bring to the table. I
wish I saw a lot more of that.
What does writing give you
that nothing else does?
I think writing gives me
an alternate dimension. Almost,
it's it's like I can I can say
things that I would never be
able to write, or or sorry, let
me back up. It's like an
alternate dimension because I
can write things that I would
never be able to render myself,
and that we don't have the
capability of of rendering.
Honestly, there's never going to
be a computer that could render
what is in my head when I'm
trying to think of how to
express, you know, what being
the inside of a geode would be
like, or you know the feeling of
dating Persephone, like those
those kinds of things. I just
don't feel like they always
translate as well either. It's
like if you see something
written down, even versus spoken
aloud. There are some poems that
are meant to be spoken, and
there are some that are meant to
be read. And you can tell
because some of the ones that
are meant to be read only have
some really cool formatting and
enjambment, and some that are
meant to be spoken aloud.
Sometimes, when you read through
them, it doesn't make as much
sense until you read them as if
they're two people talking to
each other aloud. So, I think
that's that's what it gives me.
Is it gives me the opportunity
to work in a medium that
wouldn't be possible any other
way.
That makes so much sense.
We're we're starting to run out
of time, and we haven't spoken
at all about your knitting and
crocheting, and maybe maybe we
need to to book another call and
cover that because I'm I'm
curious about how how your
utilitarian fiber arts is
starting to veer into
decorative. So I'd love to speak
about that some more, but maybe
not today.
Sure, I'd love to do
that,
Soren. Where can people
find you? Where can people find
samples of your work? Where can
people reach out to you and ask
you these questions you wish
they asked you?
Well, the main hub where
all of my links and everything
are is Soren dot o o o.
Soren dot o o o, perfect.
Thank you for telling me about
your writings and and being open
and vulnerable. This has been a
wonderful conversation.
Yeah, same. I enjoyed
taking this journey with you.
If you enjoyed this
episode, if you were inspired in
any way, or if you learned
something, please leave a rating
or review on Apple Podcasts, on
Spotify, or whatever podcast
aggregator you use. Ratings and
reviews really do help. Thank
you. And that's it. I'm Nic
Steenhout. This is the work
between. If this sounds like the
kind of conversation you like,
subscribe, and I'll see you in
the next episode.